World Bank event
Let's Talk Data: Does Open Data Have an Identity Crisis?
20/05/2019 12:30 GMT-3

State of Open Data book released last Friday:
https://stateofopendata.od4d.net/

The book offers, at the same time, a broad overview of the state of open data
in the world, while also going pretty in-depth on several key issues involving
the open data lanscape. It covers how open data fares in specific sectors,
such as government finances, agriculture, education, national statistics, etc.
I also deals with current issues related to open data such as data literacy,
data infrastructure, algorithms, artificial intelligence and privacy.
Additionally, the roles of key stakeholders in the open data ecosystem, such as
governments, civil society, private sector, academia and journalism. There is
also an overview of each region of the world. Here we take a glance at Latin
America and the Caribbean.

There, the book highlights the growth of the open data movement and
strong civil society networks. Regional events, such as *Desarrollando America
Latina* and Condatos – Abrelatam, have been instrumental in shaping open data
progress in Latin America. Condatos congregates participants from governments
in the region, while its sister event Abrelatam, focuses on discussions on open
data by the region's civil society organizations.
On the other hand, countries that do not share a language in the
region, such as Brazil, have been more regularly engaged with the international
open data community, taking part in global events such as the International
Open Data Conference, in lieu of being more integrated with their regional
peers.

Another key finding in the region has been that, while participation and
engagement by civil society organizations in the region has been strong,
the private sector has been slow in adopting the use of open data for its
own benefit.

> Although there is a recognition that private sector companies using open data
> need to be included in regional discussions and activities, substantial
> efforts to make this happen have not yet materialised. There are several
> businesses working with open data and civic technology in the region, but
> only a small number work with civil society and governmental actors in the
> open data community, with firms such as Properati, Junar, and Dymaxion Labs
> acting as the exception rather than the rule.

In part this could be attributed to a lack of awareness by companies of the
opportunities to use open government data as an asset in their own business
analytics and machine learning activities to gain better insight, find more
prospective clients for their products and services, cuts operational costs
by increasing efficiency in production and logistics, and also innovate in
new data-driven bussiness. It is well known that companies have been
struggling to find enough qualified professionals with data science, data
engineering and related backgrounds.

But other factor could be influencing this. The barrier to using open
government data is so low, as it is available to everyone, that sometimes
companies do use the data but refrain from telling the outside world the
fact that they are using it. The rationale is that if they disclosed
their use of open data, they would alert the competition to make the
same use, and lose a compatitive advantage. I have been arguing about this
possibility for a while now in my talks about the open data ecosystem.
Judging from a comment Tim Davies made during the event, he seems to agree
with that point.

Tim Davies got through each chapter of the book in reverse order

Tim Davies:
* new challenges to deal with privacy and personal data without reinforcing the
  old practices of holding on to data under a power and fear rationale

Anat Lewin:
* open data policy needs to be a whole-of-government approach, and not isolated silos
* people need to work with open data as a part of their expected job, not an additional
thing on top of the regular job
* capacity building for both the supply side and demand side of data
* data literacy needs to be part of the mainline education program

Tim Davies:
* the open contracting data standard began at the World Bank, Tim Davies worked on it
* quantify the additional percentage you get when you are more open

Anat Lewin:
* data that you would normally not think of privacy issues become so depending of
  the sample size: e.g. hotel occupancy in small countries in the Caribbean

Question from the audience:
* citizen "armchair auditors" has been debunked (?)

Tim Davies:
* many business using open data don't like to reveal that they do because there
  is a lower barrier to entry
* the "armchair auditor" is possible in a long tail form. When people get
  frustrated enough with government they will dive into the data

